---
title: "What Is the Veil of Ignorance? (John Rawls)"
author: "Sloww"
source: "Sloww"
url: https://www.sloww.co/original-position-veil-of-ignorance/
retrieved: 2026-07-16
---

> Originally published by Sloww, Sloww — https://www.sloww.co/original-position-veil-of-ignorance/
> Archived 2026-07-16 for personal offline reading. All rights remain with the original author.

The following quotes and excerpts about the original position or veil of ignorance thought experiment come from A Theory of Justice by John Rawls (Amazon).Quick Housekeeping:All content in “quotation marks” is from the author (otherwise it’s paraphrased).All content is organized into my own themes (not the author’s chapters).Emphasis has been added in bold for readability/skimmability.Post Contents:Birth & DesertOriginal Position & Veil of IgnoranceWhy it MattersBirth & DesertJohn Rawls uses a variety of words/phrases: “social fortune,” “social circumstance,” “natural accident,” “natural assets,” “native endowments,” “luck in the natural lottery,” “accidents of natural endowment,” “arbitrariness of fortune,” “arbitrariness of natural contingency.”The “natural lottery” of birth:“Each person finds himself placed at birth in some particular position in some particular society, and the nature of this position materially affects his life prospects.”The basic structure of society:“The primary subject of justice is the basic structure of society. The reason for this is that its effects are so profound and pervasive, and present from birth. This structure favors some starting places over others in the division of the benefits of social cooperation.”“The natural distribution is neither just nor unjust; nor is it unjust that persons are born into society at some particular position. These are simply natural facts. What is just and unjust is the way that institutions deal with these facts. Aristocratic and caste societies are unjust because they make these contingencies the ascriptive basis for belonging to more or less enclosed and privileged social classes. The basic structure of these societies incorporates the arbitrariness found in nature. But there is no necessity for men to resign themselves to these contingencies.”“The intuitive notion here is that this structure contains various social positions and that men born into different positions have different expectations of life determined, in part, by the political system as well as by economic and social circumstances. In this way the institutions of society favor certain starting places over others. These are especially deep inequalities. Not only are they pervasive, but they affect men’s initial chances in life; yet they cannot possibly be justified by an appeal to the notions of merit or desert.”We don’t deserve our starting place:“We do not deserve our place in the distribution of native endowments, any more than we deserve our initial starting place in society.”Fortunate family and nurturing:“The initial endowment of natural assets and the contingencies of their growth and nurture in early life are arbitrary from a moral point of view.”“That we deserve the superior character that enables us to make the effort to cultivate our abilities is also problematic; for such character depends in good part upon fortunate family and social circumstances in early life for which we can claim no credit. The notion of desert does not apply here.”“It seems clear that the effort a person is willing to make is influenced by his natural abilities and skills and the alternatives open to him. The better endowed are more likely, other things equal, to strive conscientiously, and there seems to be no way to discount for their greater good fortune. The idea of rewarding desert is impracticable.”“The extent to which natural capacities develop and reach fruition is affected by all kinds of social conditions and class attitudes. Even the willingness to make an effort, to try, and so to be deserving in the ordinary sense is itself dependent upon happy family and social circumstances. It is impossible in practice to secure equal chances of achievement and culture for those similarly endowed, and therefore we may want to adopt a principle which recognizes this fact and also mitigates the arbitrary effects of the natural lottery itself.”Original Position & Veil of Ignorance“A society satisfying the principles of justice as fairness comes as close as a society can to being a voluntary scheme, for it meets the principles which free and equal persons would assent to under circumstances that are fair. In this sense its members are autonomous and the obligations they recognize self-imposed.”The “original position” is a hypothetical thought experiment:“The idea of the original position is to set up a fair procedure so that any principles agreed to will be just.”“In justice as fairness the original position of equality corresponds to the state of nature in the traditional theory of the social contract. This original position is not, of course, thought of as an actual historical state of affairs, much less as a primitive condition of culture. It is understood as a purely hypothetical situation characterized so as to lead to a certain conception of justice.”“Given the circumstances of the original position, the symmetry of everyone’s relations to each other, this initial situation is fair between individuals as moral persons, that is, as rational beings with their own ends and capable, I shall assume, of a sense of justice.”“The original position is, one might say, the appropriate initial status quo, and thus the fundamental agreements reached in it are fair. This explains the propriety of the name ‘justice as fairness’: it conveys the idea that the principles of justice are agreed to in an initial situation that is fair.”“It seems reasonable to suppose that the parties in the original position are equal.”The veil of ignorance:“The veil of ignorance is so natural a condition that something like it must have occurred to many.”“I assume that the parties are situated behind a veil of ignorance. They do not know how the various alternatives will affect their own particular case and they are obliged to evaluate principles solely on the basis of general considerations.”“The principles of justice are chosen behind a veil of ignorance. This ensures that no one is advantaged or disadvantaged in the choice of principles by the outcome of natural chance or the contingency of social circumstances. Since all are similarly situated and no one is able to design principles to favor his particular condition, the principles of justice are the result of a fair agreement or bargain.”“From the standpoint of persons similarly situated in an initial situation which is fair, the principles of explicit racist doctrines are not only unjust. They are irrational. For this reason we could say that they are not moral conceptions at all, but simply means of suppression. They have no place on a reasonable list of traditional conceptions of justice. Of course, this contention is not at all a matter of definition. It is rather a consequence of the conditions characterizing the original position, especially the conditions of the rationality of the parties and the veil of ignorance.”Imagine that you don’t know:“Among the essential features of this situation is that no one knows his place in society, his class position or social status, nor does any one know his fortune in the distribution of natural assets and abilities, his intelligence, strength, and the like.”“Nor does anyone know his conception of the good, the particulars of his rational plan of life, or even the special features of his psychology such as his aversion to risk or liability to optimism or pessimism.”“Assume that the parties do not know the particular circumstances of their own society. That is, they do not know its economic or political situation, or the level of civilization and culture it has been able to achieve. The persons in the original position have no information as to which generation they belong.”“The parties must not know the contingencies that set them in opposition. They must choose principles the consequences of which they are prepared to live with whatever generation they turn out to belong to.”The “difference principle”:“No one deserves his greater natural capacity nor merits a more favorable starting place in society. But, of course, this is no reason to ignore, much less to eliminate these distinctions. Instead, the basic structure can be arranged so that these contingencies work for the good of the least fortunate. Thus we are led to the difference principle if we wish to set up the social system so that no one gains or loses from his arbitrary place in the distribution of natural assets or his initial position in society without giving or receiving compensating advantages in return.”“The difference principle represents, in effect, an agreement to regard the distribution of natural talents as in some respects a common asset and to share in the greater social and economic benefits made possible by the complementarities of this distribution. Those who have been favored by nature, whoever they are, may gain from their good fortune only on terms that improve the situation of those who have lost out. The naturally advantaged are not to gain merely because they are more gifted, but only to cover the costs of training and education and for using their endowments in ways that help the less fortunate as well.”Why it Matters“Somehow we must nullify the effects of specific contingencies which put men at odds and tempt them to exploit social and natural circumstances to their own advantage.”The least advantaged:“It seems reasonable and generally acceptable that no one should be advantaged or disadvantaged by natural fortune or social circumstances.”“This group includes persons whose family and class origins are more disadvantaged than others, whose natural endowments (as realized) permit them to fare less well, and whose fortune and luck in the course of life turn out to be less happy, all within the normal range and with the relevant measures based on social primary goods.”“To treat all persons equally, to provide genuine equality of opportunity, society must give more attention to those with fewer native assets and to those born into the less favorable social positions. The idea is to redress the bias of contingencies in the direction of equality.”“Undeserved inequalities call for redress; and since inequalities of birth and natural endowment are undeserved, these inequalities are to be somehow compensated for.”“Social and economic inequalities, for example inequalities of wealth and authority, are just only if they result in compensating benefits for everyone, and in particular for the least advantaged members of society.”Common benefit and well-being:“The social system is not an unchangeable order beyond human control but a pattern of human action. In justice as fairness men agree to avail themselves of the accidents of nature and social circumstance only when doing so is for the common benefit.”“No one is to benefit from these contingencies except in ways that redound to the well-being of others.”“It is incorrect that individuals with greater natural endowments and the superior character that has made their development possible have a right to a cooperative scheme that enables them to obtain even further benefits in ways that do not contribute to the advantages of others.”“The premiums earned by scarce natural talents, for example, are to cover the costs of training and to encourage the efforts of learning, as well as to direct ability to where it best furthers the common interest.”“Chances to acquire cultural knowledge and skills should not depend upon one’s class position, and so the school system, whether public or private, should be designed to even out class barriers.”Happiness and the good life:“With great luck and good fortune some men might by nature just happen to hit upon the way of living that they would adopt with deliberative rationality. For the most part, though, we are not so blessed.”“The achievement of happiness depends upon circumstances and luck, and hence the gloss about favorable conditions.”“With certain qualifications we can think of a person as being happy when he is in the way of a successful execution (more or less) of a rational plan of life drawn up under (more or less) favorable conditions, and he is reasonably confident that his plan can be carried through. Someone is happy when his plans are going well, his more important aspirations being fulfilled, and he feels sure that his good fortune will endure.”“The achievement of happiness in the larger sense of a happy life, or of a happy period of one’s life, always presumes a degree of good fortune.”You May Also Enjoy:The Lottery of Birth: All the Things You Don’t Control in LifeThe Ovarian Lottery: A Thought Experiment from Warren BuffettThe Lottery of Birth: “Creating Freedom” by Raoul Martinez (Book Summary)🔒 Lottery of Birth Synthesis: How to See Yourself and the World Drastically Differently (+ Infographic)🔒 Behind the Scenes: Dissecting my own Lottery of Birth Ticket🔒 Behind the Scenes: How I Live with the Lottery of Birth & Lack of Free WillAbout Kyle Kowalski👋 Hi, I'm Kyle―the human behind Sloww. I'm an ex-marketing executive turned self-education entrepreneur after an existential crisis in 2015. In one sentence: my purpose is synthesizing lifelong learning that catalyzes deeper development. But, I’m not a professor, philosopher, psychologist, sociologist, anthropologist, scientist, mystic, or guru. I’m an interconnector across all those humans and many more—an "independent, inquiring, interdisciplinary integrator" (in other words, it's just me over here, asking questions, crossing disciplines, and making connections). To keep it simple, you can just call me a "synthesizer." Sloww shares the art of living with students of life. Read my story.
