---
title: "ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (original paper)"
author: "NeurIPS, 2012"
source: "NeurIPS, 2012"
url: https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2012/hash/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Abstract.html
retrieved: 2026-07-14
---

> Originally published by NeurIPS, 2012, NeurIPS, 2012 — https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2012/hash/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Abstract.html
> Archived 2026-07-14 for personal offline reading. All rights remain with the original author.

Abstract
            We trained a large, deep convolutional neural network to classify the 1.3 million high-resolution images in the LSVRC-2010 ImageNet training set into the 1000 different classes. On the test data, we achieved top-1 and top-5 error rates of 39.7\% and 18.9\% which is considerably better than the previous state-of-the-art results. The neural network, which has 60 million parameters and 500,000 neurons, consists of five convolutional layers, some of which are followed by max-pooling layers, and two globally connected layers with a final 1000-way softmax. To make training faster, we used non-saturating neurons and a very efficient GPU implementation of convolutional nets. To reduce overfitting in the globally connected layers we employed a new regularization method that proved to be very effective.

        
                Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked.  However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues.  Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.

Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.

              Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly
